Type declarations (#102)
WordPress/wpcs-docs: wordpress-coding-standards/php.md

The following code examples cover the rule about formatting traits regarding things like spacing, grouping and indentation.

```php
// Correct.
class Foo {

    // Comments above a use statement will be regarded as documentation for the statement.
    use Bar_Trait;
    use Foo_Trait,
        Bazinga_Trait {
        Bar_Trait::method_name insteadof Bar_Trait;
        Bazinga_Trait::method_name as bazinga_method;
    }
    use Loopy_Trait { eat as protected; }

    public $baz = true;

    ...
}

class Foo {

    use Bar_Trait;
}

// Incorrect.
class Foo {
    use       Bar_Trait; // No blank line before class declaration, multiple spaces after the use statement.

    use Foo_Trait,   Bazinga_Trait{Bar_Trait::method_name    insteadof     Foo_Trait; Bazinga_Trait::method_name // Multiple spaces when importing traits, no new line after opening brace
        as     bazinga_method; // Multiple spaces, should be on the same line as the method it's replacing.
            }; // Wrongly indented brace.
    public $baz = true; // Missing blank line after trait import.

    ...
}
```

### Type declarations

[alert]

> In WordPress Core, type declaration usage has the following restrictions based on the minimum required PHP version:

Reviewer: > In WordPress Core,...

Surely this also applies to any plugin or theme as well, not just WP core?

Author: Valid point 👍🏼 I will remove the part about the WP Core.

> - The scalar `bool`, `int`, `float` and `string` type declarations can not be used until the minimum PHP version has been raised to PHP 7.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The scalar `bool`, `int`, `float`, and `string` type declarations can not be used until the minimum PHP version has been raised to PHP 7.0.
```

- Return type declarations can not be used until the minimum PHP version has been raised to PHP 7.0.
- Nullable type declarations can not be used until the minimum PHP version has been raised to PHP 7.1.

> - The `iterable`, `void` and `object` type declarations can not be used until the minimum PHP version has been raised to PHP 7.1 and 7.2 respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `iterable`, `void`, and `object` type declarations can not be used until the minimum PHP version has been raised to PHP 7.1 and 7.2 respectively.
```

Alternatively, split these up into separate bullets for PHP 7.1 and PHP 7.2.

Author: Splitting these might make more sense, seeing how others are split by versions 👍🏼

> Property type declarations can not be used until the minimum PHP version has been raised to PHP 7.4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Property type declarations can not be used until the minimum PHP version has been raised to PHP 7.4.
```

Return type declarations should have no space between the closing parenthesis of the function declaration and the colon starting a return type.

These rules apply to all structures allowing for type declarations: functions, closures, catch conditions as well as the PHP 7.4 arrow functions and typed properties.

The following examples showcase what type hints are currently available in the WordPress Core due to the minimum supported PHP version

```php
// Correct.
function foo( Class_Name $parameter, callable $callable, array $number_of_things = [] ) {
    // Do something.
}

function bar(
    Interface_Name $param_a,
    array $param_b,
    callable $param_c = 'default_callable'
) {
    // Do something.
}

// Incorrect.
function baz(Class_Name $param_a, String$param_b,      CALLABLE     $param_c ) {
    // Do something.
}
```

The following examples showcase what you can use in your themes and plugins if you require specific minimum PHP version (7.4 for instance)

```php
// Correct.
function foo( Class_Name $param_a, ?string $param_b, callable $param_c ): ?\Class_Name {
    // Do something.
}

function bar(
    Interface_Name $param_a,
    ?int $param_b,
    bool $param_c

> ): ?\Class_Name {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
): iterable {
```

Just to mix it up a little as the `foo()` function above also returns the exact same type, and it's good to see a non-null, non-FQCN example.

);
```

### Type declarations

> [alert]

Reviewer 2: Like with other new sections, I would move this part (the `alert` box) to the bottom of the section _after_ the CS rules (as these are not CS rules, but information about the PHP feature).

Also: is `alert` the red style ? Should this maybe be an info box (blue IIRC) instead ?

Reviewer 2: Just checked - `alert` is the yellow style.

I think it may be good to have some standardization of when we use which type of box. What about this:
* `info` (blue) for information about PHP features and how to use them.
* `alert` (yellow) for information on whether or not something can be used in WP Core.
* `warning` (red) for anything really problematic (like using the `wp` namespace prefix).

Reviewer 2: Oh and on that same note: what about standardizing the order as well ?

I'm thinking:
* CS rules
* Possible code samples
* Usage in Core (if needed)
* PHP feature info (if needed)

That would also imply that the "boxes" at the bottom of this section and for "trait use" would need to be reversed, but we'd be making the docs consistent and predictable for the reader if we have a set order for things.

Author: I'll open an issue and once we merge all the others I can open up a new PR with just these changes 👍🏼

Type declaration usage has the following restrictions based on the minimum required PHP version:

- The scalar `bool`, `int`, `float`, and `string` type declarations cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 7.0 or higher.
- Return type declarations cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 7.0 or higher.
- Nullable type declarations cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 7.1 or higher.
- The `iterable` and `void` type declarations cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 7.1 or higher. The `void` can only be used as a return type.
- The `object` type declaration cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 7.2 or higher.
- Property type declarations cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 7.4 or higher.
- `static` return type cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 8 or higher.
- `mixed` type cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 8 or higher. Because `mixed` type includes `null`. it's not allowed to make it nullable.
- Union types cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 8 or higher.
- Intersection types cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 8.1 or higher.

> - `never` return type cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 8.1 or higher.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `never` (return type only) cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 8.1 or higher.
- Disjunctive normal form types (combining union types and intersection types) cannot be used until the minimum PHP version is PHP 8.2 or higher.
```

Might as well anticipate on PHP 8.2 as otherwise we'd need to edit this again in a few months time.

[/alert]

> Type declarations must have exactly one space before and after the type. The nullability operator (`?`) is regarded as part of the type declaration and there should be no space between this operator and the actual type. Class/interface name based type declarations should use the case of the class/interface name as declared, while the keyword-based type declarations should be lowercased.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Type declarations must have exactly one space before and after the type. The nullability operator (`?`) is regarded as part of the type declaration and there should be no space between this operator and the actual type. Class/interface/enum name based type declarations should use the case of the class/interface/enum name as declared, while the keyword-based type declarations should be lowercased.
```

Return type declarations should have no space between the closing parenthesis of the function declaration and the colon starting a return type.

> These rules apply to all structures allowing for type declarations: functions, closures, catch conditions as well as the PHP 7.4 arrow functions and typed properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These rules apply to all structures allowing for type declarations: functions, closures, enums, catch conditions as well as the PHP 7.4 arrow functions and typed properties.
```

> The following examples showcase what type hints are currently available in the WordPress Core due to the minimum supported PHP version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following examples showcase what type declarations are currently available in WordPress Core due to the minimum supported PHP version:
```

To be honest, I'd be tempted to say: combine the two sets of examples. The info/alert boxes at the bottom will contain the info on what can be used in Core and what not.

Author: I think we can remove the examples for themes and plugins, to reduce any possible confusion. And as you've mentioned, people will have the info box with all the available types 🙂 👍🏼

```php
// Correct.
function foo( Class_Name $parameter, callable $callable, array $number_of_things = [] ) {
    // Do something.
}

function bar(
    Interface_Name $param_a,
    array $param_b,
    callable $param_c = 'default_callable'
) {
    // Do something.
}

// Incorrect.
function baz(Class_Name $param_a, String$param_b,      CALLABLE     $param_c ) {
    // Do something.
}
```

The following examples showcase what you can use in your themes and plugins if you require specific minimum PHP version (7.4 for instance)

```php
// Correct.
function foo( Class_Name $param_a, ?string $param_b, callable $param_c ): ?\Class_Name {
    // Do something.
}

function bar(
    Interface_Name $param_a,
    ?int $param_b,
    bool $param_c
): iterable {
    // Do something.
}

// Incorrect.
function baz(Class_Name $param_a, ? Float$param_b,      CALLABLE     $param_c )  :   ?  \Class_Name{
    // Do something.
}
```

_Usage in WordPress Core_

[warning]
Adding type declarations to existing WordPress Core functions should be done with extreme care.
[/warning]

> While rare, `array` and class/interface name based type declarations already exist in WordPress Core.

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence can be left out.

The function signature of any function (method) which can be overloaded by plugins or themes should not be touched.

> This includes all existing `public` and `protected` class methods and any conditionally declared (pluggable) functions in the global namespace.

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence can be left out.

> This leaves, for now, only unconditionally declared functions in the global namespace, `private` class methods, and code newly being introduced as candidates for adding type declarations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This leaves, for now, only unconditionally declared functions in the global namespace, `private` class methods, and code  new to Core, as candidates for adding type declarations.
```

> For those, adding `callable`, class and interface name based parameter type declarations where the parameter type only expects one type and it would allow for simplification of existing/new code, is allowed and tentatively encouraged.

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence can be left out.

> Using the `array` keyword in type declarations is **strongly discouraged** for now, as most often, it would be better to use `iterable` to allow for more flexibility in the implementation and that keyword is not yet available for use in WordPress Core until the minimum requirements are raised to PHP 7.1.

Reviewer 2: If the "leave out" suggestions would be applied, I think this should be prefixed with "Note:".

```suggestion
Note: Using the `array` keyword in type declarations is **strongly discouraged** for now, as most often, it would be better to use `iterable` to allow for more flexibility in the implementation and that keyword is not yet available for use in WordPress Core until the minimum requirements are raised to PHP 7.1.
```
